README.md, before:

[![Code Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy/master.svg)](https://codecov.io/github/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy?branch=master)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)](https://goreportcard.com/report/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)
[![GolangCI](https://golangci.com/badges/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy.svg)](https://golangci.com/r/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)
[![Go Doc](https://godoc.org/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)

# DNS Proxy <!-- omit in toc -->

A simple DNS proxy server that supports all existing DNS protocols including
`DNS-over-TLS`, `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNSCrypt`, and `DNS-over-QUIC`. Moreover,
it can work as a `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNS-over-TLS` or `DNS-over-QUIC` server.

- [How to install](#how-to-install)
- [How to build](#how-to-build)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Examples](#examples)
  - [Simple options](#simple-options)
  - [Encrypted upstreams](#encrypted-upstreams)
  - [Encrypted DNS server](#encrypted-dns-server)
  - [Additional features](#additional-features)
  - [DNS64 server](#dns64-server)
  - [Fastest addr + cache-min-ttl](#fastest-addr--cache-min-ttl)
  - [Specifying upstreams for domains](#specifying-upstreams-for-domains)
  - [EDNS Client Subnet](#edns-client-subnet)
  - [Bogus NXDomain](#bogus-nxdomain)

## How to install

There are several options how to install `dnsproxy`.

1. Grab the binary for your device/OS from the [Releases][releases] page.
2. Use the [official Docker image][docker].
3. Build it yourself (see the instruction below).

[releases]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy/releases
[docker]: https://hub.docker.com/r/adguard/dnsproxy

## How to build

You will need Go v1.20 or later.

```shell
$ make build
```

## Usage

```
Usage:
  dnsproxy [OPTIONS]

Application Options:
      --config-path=           yaml configuration file. Minimal working configuration in config.yaml.dist.
                               Options passed through command line will override the ones from this file.
  -v, --verbose                Verbose output (optional)
  -o, --output=                Path to the log file. If not set, write to stdout.
  -l, --listen=                Listening addresses
  -p, --port=                  Listening ports. Zero value disables TCP and UDP listeners
  -s, --https-port=            Listening ports for DNS-over-HTTPS
  -t, --tls-port=              Listening ports for DNS-over-TLS
  -q, --quic-port=             Listening ports for DNS-over-QUIC
  -y, --dnscrypt-port=         Listening ports for DNSCrypt
  -c, --tls-crt=               Path to a file with the certificate chain
  -k, --tls-key=               Path to a file with the private key
      --tls-min-version=       Minimum TLS version, for example 1.0
      --tls-max-version=       Maximum TLS version, for example 1.3
      --insecure               Disable secure TLS certificate validation
  -g, --dnscrypt-config=       Path to a file with DNSCrypt configuration. You can generate one using https://github.com/ameshkov/dnscrypt
      --http3                  Enable HTTP/3 support
  -u, --upstream=              An upstream to be used (can be specified multiple times).
                               You can also specify path to a file with the list of servers
  -b, --bootstrap=             Bootstrap DNS for DoH and DoT, can be specified multiple times (default: 8.8.8.8:53)
  -f, --fallback=              Fallback resolvers to use when regular ones are unavailable, can be specified multiple times.
                               You can also specify path to a file with the list of servers
      --private-rdns-upstream= Private DNS upstreams to use for reverse DNS lookups of private addresses, can
                               be specified multiple times
      --all-servers            If specified, parallel queries to all configured upstream servers are enabled
      --fastest-addr           Respond to A or AAAA requests only with the fastest IP address
      --timeout=               Timeout for outbound DNS queries to remote upstream servers in a
                               human-readable form (default: 10s)
      --cache                  If specified, DNS cache is enabled
      --cache-size=            Cache size (in bytes). Default: 64k
      --cache-min-ttl=         Minimum TTL value for DNS entries, in seconds. Capped at 3600.
                               Artificially extending TTLs should only be done with careful consideration.
      --cache-max-ttl=         Maximum TTL value for DNS entries, in seconds.
      --cache-optimistic       If specified, optimistic DNS cache is enabled
  -r, --ratelimit=             Ratelimit (requests per second)
      --refuse-any             If specified, refuse ANY requests
      --edns                   Use EDNS Client Subnet extension
      --edns-addr=             Send EDNS Client Address
      --dns64                  If specified, dnsproxy will act as a DNS64 server
      --dns64-prefix=          Prefix used to handle DNS64. If not specified, dnsproxy uses the 'Well-Known Prefix' 64:ff9b::.
                               Can be specified multiple times
      --https-server-name=     Set the Server header for the responses from the HTTPS server. (default: dnsproxy)
      --ipv6-disabled          If specified, all AAAA requests will be replied with NoError RCode and empty answer
      --bogus-nxdomain=        Transform the responses containing at least a single IP that matches specified addresses
                               and CIDRs into NXDOMAIN.  Can be specified multiple times.
      --udp-buf-size=          Set the size of the UDP buffer in bytes. A value <= 0 will use the system default.
      --max-go-routines=       Set the maximum number of go routines. A value <= 0 will not not set a maximum.
      --pprof                  If present, exposes pprof information on localhost:6060.
      --version                Prints the program version

Help Options:
  -h, --help              Show this help message
```

## Examples

### Simple options

Runs a DNS proxy on `0.0.0.0:53` with a single upstream - Google DNS.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53
```

The same proxy with verbose logging enabled writing it to the file `log.txt`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -v -o log.txt
```

Runs a DNS proxy on `127.0.0.1:5353` with multiple upstreams.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u 1.1.1.1:53
```

Listen on multiple interfaces and ports:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -l 192.168.1.10 -p 5353 -p 5354 -u 1.1.1.1
```

The plain DNS upstream server may be specified in several ways:

 -  With a plain IP address:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u 8.8.8.8:53
    ```

 -  With a hostname or plain IP address and the `udp://` scheme:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u udp://dns.google -u udp://1.1.1.1
    ```

 -  With a hostname or plain IP address and the `tcp://` scheme to force using
    TCP:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u tcp://dns.google -u tcp://1.1.1.1
    ```

### Encrypted upstreams

DNS-over-TLS upstream:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u tls://dns.adguard.com
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with specified bootstrap DNS:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u https://dns.adguard.com/dns-query -b 1.1.1.1:53
```

DNS-over-QUIC upstream:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u quic://dns.adguard.com
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with enabled HTTP/3 support (chooses it if it's faster):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u https://dns.google/dns-query --http3
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with forced HTTP/3 (no fallback to other protocol):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u h3://dns.google/dns-query
```

DNSCrypt upstream ([DNS Stamp](https://dnscrypt.info/stamps) of AdGuard DNS):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u sdns://AQIAAAAAAAAAFDE3Ni4xMDMuMTMwLjEzMDo1NDQzINErR_JS3PLCu_iZEIbq95zkSV2LFsigxDIuUso_OQhzIjIuZG5zY3J5cHQuZGVmYXVsdC5uczEuYWRndWFyZC5jb20
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream ([DNS Stamp](https://dnscrypt.info/stamps) of Cloudflare DNS):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u sdns://AgcAAAAAAAAABzEuMC4wLjGgENk8mGSlIfMGXMOlIlCcKvq7AVgcrZxtjon911-ep0cg63Ul-I8NlFj4GplQGb_TTLiczclX57DvMV8Q-JdjgRgSZG5zLmNsb3VkZmxhcmUuY29tCi9kbnMtcXVlcnk
```

DNS-over-TLS upstream with two fallback servers (to be used when the main upstream is not available):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u tls://dns.adguard.com -f 8.8.8.8:53 -f 1.1.1.1:53
```

### Encrypted DNS server

Runs a DNS-over-TLS proxy on `127.0.0.1:853`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --tls-port=853 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-HTTPS proxy on `127.0.0.1:443`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --https-port=443 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-HTTPS proxy on `127.0.0.1:443` with HTTP/3 support.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --https-port=443 --http3 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-QUIC proxy on `127.0.0.1:853`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --quic-port=853 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNSCrypt proxy on `127.0.0.1:443`.

```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --dnscrypt-config=./dnscrypt-config.yaml --dnscrypt-port=443 --upstream=8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

> Please note that in order to run a DNSCrypt proxy, you need to obtain DNSCrypt configuration first. You can use https://github.com/ameshkov/dnscrypt command-line tool to do that with a command like this `./dnscrypt generate --provider-name=2.dnscrypt-cert.example.org --out=dnscrypt-config.yaml`

### Additional features

Runs a DNS proxy on `0.0.0.0:53` with rate limit set to `10 rps`, enabled DNS cache, and that refuses type=ANY requests.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -r 10 --cache --refuse-any
```

Runs a DNS proxy on 127.0.0.1:5353 with multiple upstreams and enable parallel queries to all configured upstream servers.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u 1.1.1.1:53 -u tls://dns.adguard.com --all-servers
```

Loads upstreams list from a file.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u ./upstreams.txt
```

### DNS64 server

`dnsproxy` is capable of working as a DNS64 server.

> **What is DNS64/NAT64**
> This is a mechanism of providing IPv6 access to IPv4. Using a NAT64 gateway
> with IPv4-IPv6 translation capability lets IPv6-only clients connect to
> IPv4-only services via synthetic IPv6 addresses starting with a prefix that
> routes them to the NAT64 gateway. DNS64 is a DNS service that returns AAAA
> records with these synthetic IPv6 addresses for IPv4-only destinations
> (with A but not AAAA records in the DNS). This lets IPv6-only clients use
> NAT64 gateways without any other configuration.

See also [RFC 6147](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6147).

Enables DNS64 with the default [Well-Known Prefix][wkp]:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8 --private-rdns-upstream=127.0.0.1  --dns64
```

You can also specify any number of custom DNS64 prefixes:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8 --private-rdns-upstream=127.0.0.1 --dns64 --dns64-prefix=64:ffff:: --dns64-prefix=32:ffff::
```

Note that only the first specified prefix will be used for synthesis.

PTR queries for addresses within the specified ranges or the
[Well-Known one][wkp] could only be answered with locally appropriate data, so
dnsproxy will route those to the local upstream servers.  Those should be
specified if DNS64 is enabled.

[wkp]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6052#section-2.1

### Fastest addr + cache-min-ttl

This option would be useful to the users with problematic network connection.
In this mode, `dnsproxy` would detect the fastest IP address among all that were returned,
and it will return only it.

Additionally, for those with problematic network connection, it makes sense to override `cache-min-ttl`.
In this case, `dnsproxy` will make sure that DNS responses are cached for at least the specified amount of time.

It makes sense to run it with multiple upstream servers only.

Run a DNS proxy with two upstreams, min-TTL set to 10 minutes, fastest address detection is enabled:
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8 -u 1.1.1.1 --cache --cache-min-ttl=600 --fastest-addr
```

 who run `dnsproxy` with multiple upstreams

### Specifying upstreams for domains

You can specify upstreams that will be used for a specific domain(s). We use the dnsmasq-like syntax (see `--server` description [here](http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/docs/dnsmasq-man.html)).

**Syntax:** `[/[domain1][/../domainN]/]upstreamString`

If one or more domains are specified, that upstream (`upstreamString`) is used only for those domains. Usually, it is used for private nameservers. For instance, if you have a nameserver on your network which deals with `xxx.internal.local` at `192.168.0.1` then you can specify `[/internal.local/]192.168.0.1`, and dnsproxy will send all queries to that nameserver. Everything else will be sent to the default upstreams (which are mandatory!).

1. An empty domain specification, // has the special meaning of "unqualified names only" ie names without any dots in them.
2. More specific domains take precedence over less specific domains, so: `--upstream=[/host.com/]1.2.3.4 --upstream=[/www.host.com/]2.3.4.5` will send queries for *.host.com to 1.2.3.4, except *.www.host.com, which will go to 2.3.4.5
3. The special server address `#` means, "use the standard servers", so: `--upstream=[/host.com/]1.2.3.4 --upstream=[/www.host.com/]#` will send queries for \*.host.com to 1.2.3.4, except \*.www.host.com which will be forwarded as usual.
4. The wildcard `*` has special meaning of "any sub-domain", so: `--upstream=[/*.host.com/]1.2.3.4` will send queries for \*.host.com to 1.2.3.4, but host.com will be forwarded to default upstreams.

**Examples**

Sends queries for `*.local` domains to `192.168.0.1:53`. Other queries are sent to `8.8.8.8:53`.
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/local/]192.168.0.1:53
```

Sends queries for `*.host.com` to `1.1.1.1:53` except for `*.maps.host.com` which are sent to `8.8.8.8:53` (along with other queries).
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/host.com/]1.1.1.1:53 -u [/maps.host.com/]#
```

Sends queries for `*.host.com` to `1.1.1.1:53` except for `host.com` which is sent to `8.8.8.8:53` (along with other queries).
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/*.host.com/]1.1.1.1:53
```

### EDNS Client Subnet

To enable support for EDNS Client Subnet extension you should run dnsproxy with `--edns` flag:

```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 --edns
```

Now if you connect to the proxy from the Internet - it will pass through your original IP address's prefix to the upstream server.  This way the upstream server may respond with IP addresses of the servers that are located near you to minimize latency.

If you want to use EDNS CS feature when you're connecting to the proxy from a local network, you need to set `--edns-addr=PUBLIC_IP` argument:

```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 --edns --edns-addr=72.72.72.72
```

Now even if your IP address is 192.168.0.1 and it's not a public IP, the proxy will pass through 72.72.72.72 to the upstream server.

### Bogus NXDomain

This option is similar to dnsmasq `bogus-nxdomain`.  `dnsproxy` will transform
responses that contain at least a single IP address which is also specified by
the option into `NXDOMAIN`. Can be specified multiple times.

In the example below, we use AdGuard DNS server that returns `0.0.0.0` for
blocked domains, and transform them to `NXDOMAIN`.

```
./dnsproxy -u 94.140.14.14:53 --bogus-nxdomain=0.0.0.0
```

CIDR ranges are supported as well.  The following will respond with `NXDOMAIN`
instead of responses containing any IP from `192.168.0.0`-`192.168.255.255`:

```
./dnsproxy -u 192.168.0.15:53 --bogus-nxdomain=192.168.0.0/16
```

Commit message:

Pull request 287: 4977-proxy-multiple-reserved-upstreams
Squashed commit of the following:

commit deae48b40a1fd62d5ded7ae7d246ff8e9eddc17e
Merge: 5a07daa 46b2b1c
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Wed Oct 18 17:04:43 2023 +0300

    Merge branch 'master' into 4977-proxy-multiple-reserved-upstreams

commit 5a07daaef7844c0e0c292743eb0781ed82dca78f
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Wed Oct 18 17:04:27 2023 +0300

    proxy: imp docs

commit fef1e08c877993c4c8869f396476ed9ae0af687f
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Mon Oct 16 16:30:36 2023 +0300

    proxy: imp code

commit c4eb1707a3d762928f05774919a2e8eeea23ed37
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Fri Oct 13 15:00:43 2023 +0300

    proxy: imp docs

commit 479c2bf0d152bb04590526e0bcc1ba9ee796a57f
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Thu Oct 12 17:53:32 2023 +0300

    proxy: add todo

commit e9abe2bcc9326c5dea05eecca6906b20b92ca9e2
Merge: 16da7db 2424a8e
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Thu Oct 12 15:17:38 2023 +0300

    Merge branch 'master' into 4977-proxy-multiple-reserved-upstreams

commit 16da7db810dec07a1091c59d145a3dad5ed2ad5e
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Thu Oct 12 14:24:13 2023 +0300

    all: upd docs

commit 561cb22c60e7dab438a9055457de51d5cc62c84c
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Wed Oct 11 20:12:16 2023 +0300

    proxy: add tests

commit b13e76ee39c80a138ee2504aaae069d598f9aa6e
Author: Stanislav Chzhen <s.chzhen@adguard.com>
Date:   Tue Oct 10 20:01:21 2023 +0300

    proxy: multiple reserved upstreams

README.md, after:

[![Code Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy/master.svg)](https://codecov.io/github/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy?branch=master)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)](https://goreportcard.com/report/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)
[![GolangCI](https://golangci.com/badges/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy.svg)](https://golangci.com/r/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)
[![Go Doc](https://godoc.org/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy)

# DNS Proxy <!-- omit in toc -->

A simple DNS proxy server that supports all existing DNS protocols including
`DNS-over-TLS`, `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNSCrypt`, and `DNS-over-QUIC`. Moreover,
it can work as a `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNS-over-TLS` or `DNS-over-QUIC` server.

- [How to install](#how-to-install)
- [How to build](#how-to-build)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Examples](#examples)
  - [Simple options](#simple-options)
  - [Encrypted upstreams](#encrypted-upstreams)
  - [Encrypted DNS server](#encrypted-dns-server)
  - [Additional features](#additional-features)
  - [DNS64 server](#dns64-server)
  - [Fastest addr + cache-min-ttl](#fastest-addr--cache-min-ttl)
  - [Specifying upstreams for domains](#specifying-upstreams-for-domains)
  - [EDNS Client Subnet](#edns-client-subnet)
  - [Bogus NXDomain](#bogus-nxdomain)

## How to install

There are several options how to install `dnsproxy`.

1. Grab the binary for your device/OS from the [Releases][releases] page.
2. Use the [official Docker image][docker].
3. Build it yourself (see the instruction below).

[releases]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/dnsproxy/releases
[docker]: https://hub.docker.com/r/adguard/dnsproxy

## How to build

You will need Go v1.20 or later.

```shell
$ make build
```

## Usage

```
Usage:
  dnsproxy [OPTIONS]

Application Options:
      --config-path=           yaml configuration file. Minimal working configuration in config.yaml.dist.
                               Options passed through command line will override the ones from this file.
  -v, --verbose                Verbose output (optional)
  -o, --output=                Path to the log file. If not set, write to stdout.
  -l, --listen=                Listening addresses
  -p, --port=                  Listening ports. Zero value disables TCP and UDP listeners
  -s, --https-port=            Listening ports for DNS-over-HTTPS
  -t, --tls-port=              Listening ports for DNS-over-TLS
  -q, --quic-port=             Listening ports for DNS-over-QUIC
  -y, --dnscrypt-port=         Listening ports for DNSCrypt
  -c, --tls-crt=               Path to a file with the certificate chain
  -k, --tls-key=               Path to a file with the private key
      --tls-min-version=       Minimum TLS version, for example 1.0
      --tls-max-version=       Maximum TLS version, for example 1.3
      --insecure               Disable secure TLS certificate validation
  -g, --dnscrypt-config=       Path to a file with DNSCrypt configuration. You can generate one using https://github.com/ameshkov/dnscrypt
      --http3                  Enable HTTP/3 support
  -u, --upstream=              An upstream to be used (can be specified multiple times).
                               You can also specify path to a file with the list of servers
  -b, --bootstrap=             Bootstrap DNS for DoH and DoT, can be specified multiple times (default: 8.8.8.8:53)
  -f, --fallback=              Fallback resolvers to use when regular ones are unavailable, can be specified multiple times.
                               You can also specify path to a file with the list of servers
      --private-rdns-upstream= Private DNS upstreams to use for reverse DNS lookups of private addresses, can
                               be specified multiple times
      --all-servers            If specified, parallel queries to all configured upstream servers are enabled
      --fastest-addr           Respond to A or AAAA requests only with the fastest IP address
      --timeout=               Timeout for outbound DNS queries to remote upstream servers in a
                               human-readable form (default: 10s)
      --cache                  If specified, DNS cache is enabled
      --cache-size=            Cache size (in bytes). Default: 64k
      --cache-min-ttl=         Minimum TTL value for DNS entries, in seconds. Capped at 3600.
                               Artificially extending TTLs should only be done with careful consideration.
      --cache-max-ttl=         Maximum TTL value for DNS entries, in seconds.
      --cache-optimistic       If specified, optimistic DNS cache is enabled
  -r, --ratelimit=             Ratelimit (requests per second)
      --refuse-any             If specified, refuse ANY requests
      --edns                   Use EDNS Client Subnet extension
      --edns-addr=             Send EDNS Client Address
      --dns64                  If specified, dnsproxy will act as a DNS64 server
      --dns64-prefix=          Prefix used to handle DNS64. If not specified, dnsproxy uses the 'Well-Known Prefix' 64:ff9b::.
                               Can be specified multiple times
      --https-server-name=     Set the Server header for the responses from the HTTPS server. (default: dnsproxy)
      --ipv6-disabled          If specified, all AAAA requests will be replied with NoError RCode and empty answer
      --bogus-nxdomain=        Transform the responses containing at least a single IP that matches specified addresses
                               and CIDRs into NXDOMAIN.  Can be specified multiple times.
      --udp-buf-size=          Set the size of the UDP buffer in bytes. A value <= 0 will use the system default.
      --max-go-routines=       Set the maximum number of go routines. A value <= 0 will not not set a maximum.
      --pprof                  If present, exposes pprof information on localhost:6060.
      --version                Prints the program version

Help Options:
  -h, --help              Show this help message
```

## Examples

### Simple options

Runs a DNS proxy on `0.0.0.0:53` with a single upstream - Google DNS.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53
```

The same proxy with verbose logging enabled writing it to the file `log.txt`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -v -o log.txt
```

Runs a DNS proxy on `127.0.0.1:5353` with multiple upstreams.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u 1.1.1.1:53
```

Listen on multiple interfaces and ports:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -l 192.168.1.10 -p 5353 -p 5354 -u 1.1.1.1
```

The plain DNS upstream server may be specified in several ways:

 -  With a plain IP address:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u 8.8.8.8:53
    ```

 -  With a hostname or plain IP address and the `udp://` scheme:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u udp://dns.google -u udp://1.1.1.1
    ```

 -  With a hostname or plain IP address and the `tcp://` scheme to force using
    TCP:
    ```shell
    ./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -u tcp://dns.google -u tcp://1.1.1.1
    ```

### Encrypted upstreams

DNS-over-TLS upstream:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u tls://dns.adguard.com
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with specified bootstrap DNS:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u https://dns.adguard.com/dns-query -b 1.1.1.1:53
```

DNS-over-QUIC upstream:
```shell
./dnsproxy -u quic://dns.adguard.com
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with enabled HTTP/3 support (chooses it if it's faster):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u https://dns.google/dns-query --http3
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream with forced HTTP/3 (no fallback to other protocol):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u h3://dns.google/dns-query
```

DNSCrypt upstream ([DNS Stamp](https://dnscrypt.info/stamps) of AdGuard DNS):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u sdns://AQIAAAAAAAAAFDE3Ni4xMDMuMTMwLjEzMDo1NDQzINErR_JS3PLCu_iZEIbq95zkSV2LFsigxDIuUso_OQhzIjIuZG5zY3J5cHQuZGVmYXVsdC5uczEuYWRndWFyZC5jb20
```

DNS-over-HTTPS upstream ([DNS Stamp](https://dnscrypt.info/stamps) of Cloudflare DNS):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u sdns://AgcAAAAAAAAABzEuMC4wLjGgENk8mGSlIfMGXMOlIlCcKvq7AVgcrZxtjon911-ep0cg63Ul-I8NlFj4GplQGb_TTLiczclX57DvMV8Q-JdjgRgSZG5zLmNsb3VkZmxhcmUuY29tCi9kbnMtcXVlcnk
```

DNS-over-TLS upstream with two fallback servers (to be used when the main upstream is not available):
```shell
./dnsproxy -u tls://dns.adguard.com -f 8.8.8.8:53 -f 1.1.1.1:53
```

### Encrypted DNS server

Runs a DNS-over-TLS proxy on `127.0.0.1:853`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --tls-port=853 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-HTTPS proxy on `127.0.0.1:443`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --https-port=443 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-HTTPS proxy on `127.0.0.1:443` with HTTP/3 support.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --https-port=443 --http3 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNS-over-QUIC proxy on `127.0.0.1:853`.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --quic-port=853 --tls-crt=example.crt --tls-key=example.key -u 8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

Runs a DNSCrypt proxy on `127.0.0.1:443`.

```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 --dnscrypt-config=./dnscrypt-config.yaml --dnscrypt-port=443 --upstream=8.8.8.8:53 -p 0
```

> Please note that in order to run a DNSCrypt proxy, you need to obtain DNSCrypt configuration first. You can use https://github.com/ameshkov/dnscrypt command-line tool to do that with a command like this `./dnscrypt generate --provider-name=2.dnscrypt-cert.example.org --out=dnscrypt-config.yaml`

### Additional features

Runs a DNS proxy on `0.0.0.0:53` with rate limit set to `10 rps`, enabled DNS cache, and that refuses type=ANY requests.
```shell
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -r 10 --cache --refuse-any
```

Runs a DNS proxy on 127.0.0.1:5353 with multiple upstreams and enable parallel queries to all configured upstream servers.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u 1.1.1.1:53 -u tls://dns.adguard.com --all-servers
```

Loads upstreams list from a file.
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u ./upstreams.txt
```

### DNS64 server

`dnsproxy` is capable of working as a DNS64 server.

> **What is DNS64/NAT64**
> This is a mechanism of providing IPv6 access to IPv4. Using a NAT64 gateway
> with IPv4-IPv6 translation capability lets IPv6-only clients connect to
> IPv4-only services via synthetic IPv6 addresses starting with a prefix that
> routes them to the NAT64 gateway. DNS64 is a DNS service that returns AAAA
> records with these synthetic IPv6 addresses for IPv4-only destinations
> (with A but not AAAA records in the DNS). This lets IPv6-only clients use
> NAT64 gateways without any other configuration.

See also [RFC 6147](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6147).

Enables DNS64 with the default [Well-Known Prefix][wkp]:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8 --private-rdns-upstream=127.0.0.1  --dns64
```

You can also specify any number of custom DNS64 prefixes:
```shell
./dnsproxy -l 127.0.0.1 -p 5353 -u 8.8.8.8 --private-rdns-upstream=127.0.0.1 --dns64 --dns64-prefix=64:ffff:: --dns64-prefix=32:ffff::
```

Note that only the first specified prefix will be used for synthesis.

PTR queries for addresses within the specified ranges or the
[Well-Known one][wkp] could only be answered with locally appropriate data, so
dnsproxy will route those to the local upstream servers.  Those should be
specified if DNS64 is enabled.

[wkp]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6052#section-2.1

### Fastest addr + cache-min-ttl

This option would be useful to the users with problematic network connection.
In this mode, `dnsproxy` would detect the fastest IP address among all that were returned,
and it will return only it.

Additionally, for those with problematic network connection, it makes sense to override `cache-min-ttl`.
In this case, `dnsproxy` will make sure that DNS responses are cached for at least the specified amount of time.

It makes sense to run it with multiple upstream servers only.

Run a DNS proxy with two upstreams, min-TTL set to 10 minutes, fastest address detection is enabled:
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8 -u 1.1.1.1 --cache --cache-min-ttl=600 --fastest-addr
```

 who run `dnsproxy` with multiple upstreams

### Specifying upstreams for domains

You can specify upstreams that will be used for a specific domain(s). We use the dnsmasq-like syntax (see `--server` description [here](http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/docs/dnsmasq-man.html)).

**Syntax:** `[/[domain1][/../domainN]/]upstreamString`

Where `upstreamString` is one or many upstreams separated by space (e.g. `1.1.1.1` or `1.1.1.1 2.2.2.2`).

If one or more domains are specified, that upstream (`upstreamString`) is used only for those domains. Usually, it is used for private nameservers. For instance, if you have a nameserver on your network which deals with `xxx.internal.local` at `192.168.0.1` then you can specify `[/internal.local/]192.168.0.1`, and dnsproxy will send all queries to that nameserver. Everything else will be sent to the default upstreams (which are mandatory!).

1. An empty domain specification, // has the special meaning of "unqualified names only" ie names without any dots in them.
2. More specific domains take precedence over less specific domains, so: `--upstream=[/host.com/]1.2.3.4 --upstream=[/www.host.com/]2.3.4.5` will send queries for *.host.com to 1.2.3.4, except *.www.host.com, which will go to 2.3.4.5
3. The special server address `#` means, "use the standard servers", so: `--upstream=[/host.com/]1.2.3.4 --upstream=[/www.host.com/]#` will send queries for \*.host.com to 1.2.3.4, except \*.www.host.com which will be forwarded as usual.
4. The wildcard `*` has special meaning of "any sub-domain", so: `--upstream=[/*.host.com/]1.2.3.4` will send queries for \*.host.com to 1.2.3.4, but host.com will be forwarded to default upstreams.

**Examples**

Sends queries for `*.local` domains to `192.168.0.1:53`. Other queries are sent to `8.8.8.8:53`.
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/local/]192.168.0.1:53
```

Sends queries for `*.host.com` to `1.1.1.1:53` except for `*.maps.host.com` which are sent to `8.8.8.8:53` (along with other queries).
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/host.com/]1.1.1.1:53 -u [/maps.host.com/]#
```

Sends queries for `*.host.com` to `1.1.1.1:53` except for `host.com` which is sent to `8.8.8.8:53` (along with other queries).
```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 -u [/*.host.com/]1.1.1.1:53
```

### EDNS Client Subnet

To enable support for EDNS Client Subnet extension you should run dnsproxy with `--edns` flag:

```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 --edns
```

Now if you connect to the proxy from the Internet - it will pass through your original IP address's prefix to the upstream server.  This way the upstream server may respond with IP addresses of the servers that are located near you to minimize latency.

If you want to use EDNS CS feature when you're connecting to the proxy from a local network, you need to set `--edns-addr=PUBLIC_IP` argument:

```
./dnsproxy -u 8.8.8.8:53 --edns --edns-addr=72.72.72.72
```

Now even if your IP address is 192.168.0.1 and it's not a public IP, the proxy will pass through 72.72.72.72 to the upstream server.

### Bogus NXDomain

This option is similar to dnsmasq `bogus-nxdomain`.  `dnsproxy` will transform
responses that contain at least a single IP address which is also specified by
the option into `NXDOMAIN`. Can be specified multiple times.

In the example below, we use AdGuard DNS server that returns `0.0.0.0` for
blocked domains, and transform them to `NXDOMAIN`.

```
./dnsproxy -u 94.140.14.14:53 --bogus-nxdomain=0.0.0.0
```

CIDR ranges are supported as well.  The following will respond with `NXDOMAIN`
instead of responses containing any IP from `192.168.0.0`-`192.168.255.255`:

```
./dnsproxy -u 192.168.0.15:53 --bogus-nxdomain=192.168.0.0/16
```
