Docker/README.md, before:

## dnsproxy - Docker

This part of the project is to run dnsproxy in docker as server or client. The docker image pulls the current dnsproxy code, builds it and creates an alpine based docker image

Default version of docker-compose runs dnsproxy as quic server with upstream 1.1.1..1 
 1. Current version of dnsproxy docker supports `DNS-over-TLS, `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNSCrypt`, and `DNS-over-QUIC`
 2. Moreover, it can work as a `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNS-over-TLS` or `DNS-over-QUIC` server, or a simple passthrough server in a defined port

Functionalities supported by the docker image will be sub-set of the functionalities supported by dnsproxy current code

```
# docker-compose up -d
```

### Following changes required in docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-HTTPS`
```
SRVPORT: "443"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "https"
```

### Following changes required in docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-QUIC`
```
SRVPORT: "784"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "quic"
```


### Following changes required in docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-TLS`
```
SRVPORT: "853"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "tls"
```
### Following changes required in docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `client`
```
MODE: "client"
LOCALPORT: "1234" # Any local port number
```

Remove EDNS flag in docker-compose.yml, if EDNS support is not required

Commit message:

Updates the README.md with more relevant comments. I hope it helps

Docker/README.md, after:

## dnsproxy - Docker

This part of the project is to run dnsproxy in docker as server or client. The docker image pulls the current dnsproxy code, builds it and creates an alpine based docker image

Default version of docker-compose runs dnsproxy as quic server with upstream 1.1.1..1 
 1. Current version of dnsproxy docker supports `DNS-over-TLS, `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNSCrypt`, and `DNS-over-QUIC`
 2. Moreover, it can work as a `DNS-over-HTTPS`, `DNS-over-TLS` or `DNS-over-QUIC` server, or a simple passthrough server in a defined port

Functionalities supported by the docker image will be sub-set of the functionalities supported by dnsproxy current code

### To start the dnsproxy as `DNS-over-TLS, `DNS-over-HTTPS` and `DNS-over-QUIC` server 
```
# cd dnsproxy/Docker/server
# docker volume create dns_cert_keys
# docker-compose up -d
```

If dnsproxy server creation fails, run this command, and chances are it will be okay
```
# docker-compose up -d --force-recreate
```

### To start the dnsproxy as client, with upstream to Adguard `DNS-over-TLS, `DNS-over-HTTPS` and `DNS-over-QUIC` server
```
# cd dnsproxy/Docker/client
# docker-compose up -d
```

### Following changes required in server/docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-HTTPS`
```
SRVPORT: "443"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "https"
```

### Following changes required in server/docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-QUIC`
```
SRVPORT: "784"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "quic"
```

### Following changes required in server/docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `DNS-over-TLS`
```
SRVPORT: "853"
MODE: "server"
PROTO: "tls"
```
### Following changes required in client/docker-compose.yml. to start dnsproxy as `client`
```
MODE: "client"
LOCALPORT: "1234" # Any local port number
```

Remove EDNS flag in docker-compose.yml, if EDNS support is not required
